# Execute Stage

The execute stage is a logical stage which encapsulates all the
functional units (FUs). The FUs are not supposed to have inter-unit
dependencies for the moment, e.g.: every FU must be able to perform its
operation independently of every other unit. Each functional unit
maintains a valid signal with which it will signal valid output data and
a ready signal which tells the issue logic whether it is able to accept
a new request or not. Furthermore, as briefly explained in the section
about instruction issue (), they also receive a unique transaction ID.
The functional unit is supposed to return this transaction ID together
with the valid signal an the result. At the time of this writing the
execute stage houses an ALU, a branch unit, a load store unit (LSU), a
CSR buffer and a multiply/divide unit.

#### ALU

The arithmetic logic unit (ALU) is a small piece of hardware which
performs 32 and 64-bit subtraction, addition, shifts and comparisons. It
always completes its operation in a single cycle and therefore does not
contain any state-full elements. Its ready signal is always asserted and
it simply passes the transaction ID from its input to its output.
Together with the two operands it also receives an operator which tells
it which operation to perform.

#### Branch Unit

The branch unit's purpose is to manage all kind of control flow changes
i.e.: conditional and unconditional jumps. It does so by providing an
adder to calculate the target address and some comparison logic to
decide whether to take the branch or not. Furthermore it also decides if
a branch was mis-predicted or not and reporting corrective actions to
the PC Gen stage. Corrective actions include updating the BHT and
setting the PC if necessary. As it can be that jumps are predicted on
any instruction (including instructions which are no jumps at all - see
aliasing problem in PC Gen section) it needs to know whenever an instruction gets
issued to a functional unit and monitor the branch prediction
information. If a branch was accidentally predicted on a non-branch
instruction it also takes corrective action and re-sets the PC to the
correct address (depending on whether the instruction was compressed or
not it add PC `+ 2` or PC `+ 4`).

As briefly mentioned in the section about instruction re-aligning the
branch unit places the PC from an unaligned 32-bit instruction on the
upper 16-bit (e.g.: on a new word boundary). Moreover if an instruction
is compressed it also has an influence on the reported prediction as it
needs to set a bit if the prediction occurred on the lower 16 bit (e.g.:
the lower compressed instruction).

As can be seen this all adds a lot of costly operations to this stage,
mostly comparison and additions. Therefore the branch unit is on the critical path of the overall
design. Nevertheless, it was our design-choice to keep branches a single
cycle operation. Still, it could be the case that in a future version it
might make sense to split this path. This would bring some costly
IPC implications to the overall design mainly because of the current
restriction that the scoreboard is only admitting new instructions if
there are no unresolved branches. With a single cycle operation all
branches are resolved in the same cycle of issue which doesn't introduce
any pipeline stalls.

#### Load Store Unit (LSU)

![Load/Store Unit](_static/lsu_blockdiagram.png)

The load store unit is similar to every other functional unit. In
addition, it has to manage the interface to the data memory (D\$). In
particular, it houses the DTLB (Data Translation Lookaside Buffer), the
hardware page table walker (PTW) and the memory management unit (MMU).
It also arbitrates the access to data memory between loads, stores and
the PTW - giving precedence to PTW lookups. This is done in order to
resolve TLB misses as soon as possible. A high level block diagram of
the LSU can be found in .

The LSU can issue load request immediately while stores need to be kept
back as long as the scoreboard does not issue a commit signal: This is
done because the whole processor is designed to only have a single
commit point (see ). Because issuing loads to the memory hierarchy does
not have any semantic side effects the LSU can issue them immediately,
totally in contrast to the nature of a store. Stores alter the
architectural state and are therefore placed in a store buffer only to
be committed in a later step by the commit stage. Sometimes this is also
called *posted-store* because the store request is posted to the store
queue and waiting for entering the memory hierarchy as soon as the
commit signal goes high and the memory interface is not in use.

Therefore, upon a load, the LSU also needs to check the store buffer for
potential aliasing. Should it find uncommitted data it stalls, since it
can't satisfy the current request.

This means:

-   Two loads to the same address are allowed. They will return in issue
    order.
-   Two stores to the same address are allowed. They are issued in-order
    by the scoreboard and stored in-order in the store buffer as long as
    the scoreboard didn't give the signal to commit them.
-   A store followed by a load to the same address can only be satisfied
    if the store has already been committed (marked as committed in the
    store buffer). Otherwise the LSU stalls until the scoreboard commits
    the instruction. We cannot guarantee that the store will eventually
    be committed (e.g.: an exception occurred).

For the moment being, the LSU does not handle misaligned accesses. In
particular this means that access which are not aligned to a 64 bit
boundary for double word accesses, access which are not aligned to a
32-bit boundary for word access and the accesses which are not aligned
on 16-bit boundary for half word access. If encounters such a load or
store it will throw a misaligned exception and lets the exception
handler resolve the load or store. In addition to mis-aligned exceptions
it can also throw page fault exceptions.

To ease the design of the LSU it is split in 6 major parts of which each
is described in more detail in the upcoming paragraphs:

1. **LSU Bypass**
2. **D\$ Arbiter**
3. **Load Unit**
4. **Store Unit**
5. **MMU (including TLBs and PTW)**
6. **Non-blocking data cache**

##### LSU Bypass {#par:lsu_bypass}

The LSU bypass module is a auxiliary module which manages the LSU status
information (full flag etc.) which it presents to the issue stage. This
is necessary for a the following reason: The design of the LSU is critical in
most aspects as it directly interfaces the relatively slow SRAMs. It additionally
needs to do some costly operation in sequence. The most costly (in terms
of timing) being address generation, address translation and checking
the store buffer for potential aliasing. Therefore it is only known very
late whether the current load/store can go to memory or if additional
cycles are needed. From which aliasing on the store buffer and TLB miss
are the most prominent ones. As the issue stage relies on the
ready signal to dispatch new instructions this would result in an overly
long path which would considerably slow down the whole design because of
some corner cases.

To mitigate this problem a FIFO is added which can hold
another request from issue stage. Therefore the ready flag of the
functional units can be delayed by one cycle which eases timing.
The LSU bypass model further decouples the functional unit
from the issue stage. This is mostly necessary as the issue stage can't
stall as soon as it issued an instruction. In particular the LSU bypass
is called that way because it is either bypassed or serves the load or
store unit from its internal FIFO until they signal completion to the
LSU bypass module.

##### Load Unit {#par:load_unit}

The load unit takes care of all loads. Loads are issued as soon as
possible as they do not have any side effects. Before issuing a
load the load unit needs to check the store buffer for stores which are
not committed into the memory hierarchy yet in order to avoid loading
stale data. As a full comparison is quite costly only the lower 12 bit
(the page-offset where physical and virtual addresses are the same) are
compared. This has two major advantages: the comparison is only 12-bit
instead of 64-bit and therefore faster when done on the whole buffer
and the physical address is not needed which implies
that we don't need to wait for address translation to finish. If the
page offset matches with one of the outstanding stores the load unit
simply stalls and waits until the store buffer is drained. As an
improvement one could do some more elaborate data forwarding as the data
in the store buffer is the most up-to-date. This is not done at the
moment.

Furthermore the load unit needs to perform address translation. It makes
use of virtually indexed and physically tagged D\$ access scheme
in order to reduce the number of cycles needed for load accesses. As it
can happen that a load blocks the D\$ it
has to kill the current request on the memory interface to give way to
the hardware PTW on the cache side. Some more advanced caching
infrastructure (like a non-blocking cache) would alleviate this problem.

##### Store Unit {#par:store_unit}

The store unit manages all stores. It does so by calculating the target
address and setting the appropriate byte enable bits. Furthermore it
also performs address translation and communicates with the load unit to
see if any load matches an outstanding store in one of its buffers. Most
of the store units business logic resides in the store buffer which is
described in detail in the next section.

##### Store Buffer {#par:store_buffer}

The store buffer keeps track of all stores. It actually consists of two
buffers: One is for already committed instructions and one is for
outstanding instructions which are still speculative. On a flush only
the instruction which are already committed are persisted while the
speculative queue is completely emptied. To prevent buffer overflows the
two queues maintain a full flag. The full flag of the speculative queue
directly goes to the store unit, which will stall the LSU bypass module
and therefore not receive any more requests. On the contrast the full
signal of the commit queue goes to the commit stage. Commit stage will
stall if it the commit queue can't accept any new data items. On every
committed store the commit stage also asserts the `lsu_commit` signal
which will put the particular entry from the speculative queue into the
non-speculative (commit) queue.

As soon as a store is in the commit queue the queue will automatically
try to commit the oldest store in the queue to memory as soon as the
cache grants the request.

The store buffer only works with physical addresses. At the time when
they are committed the translation is already correct. For stores in the
speculative queue addresses are potentially not correct but this fact
will resolve if address translation data structures are updated as those
instructions will also automatically flush the whole speculative buffer.

##### Memory Management Unit (MMU) {#par:mmu}

![Memory Management Unit](_static/mmu_blockdiagramm.png)

The memory management unit (MMU) takes care of address translation (see
) and memory accesses in general. Address translation needs to be
separately activated by writing the corresponding control and status
register and switching to a lower privilege mode than machine mode. As
soon as address translation is enabled it will also handle page faults.
The MMU contains an ITLB, DTLB and hardware page table walker (HPTW).
Although logically not really entangled - the fetch interface is also
routed through the MMU. In general the fetch and data interface are
handled differently. They only share the HPTW with each other (see .

There are mainly two fundamentally different paths through the MMU: one
from the instruction fetch stage and the other from the LSU. Lets begin
with the instruction fetch interface: The IF stage makes a request to
get the memory content at a specific address. Instruction fetch will
always ask for virtual addresses. Depending on whether the address
translation is enabled the MMU will either transparently let the request
directly go to the I\$ or do address translation.

In case address translation is activated, the request to the instruction
cache is delayed until a valid translation can be found. If no valid
translation can be found the MMU will signal this with an exception.
Furthermore, if an address translation can be performed with a hit on
the ITLB it is a purely combinational path. The TLB is implemented as a
fully set-associative caches made out of flops. This in turn means that
the request path to memory is quite long and may become critical quite
easily.

If an exception occurred the exception is returned to the instruction
fetch stage together with the valid signal and not the grant signal.
This has the implication that we need to support multiple out-standing
transactions on the exception path as well (see ). The MMU has a
dedicated buffer (FIFO) which stores those exceptions and returns them
as soon as the answer is valid.

The MMUs interface on the data memory side (D\$) is entirely different.
It has a simple request-response interfaces guarded by handshaking
signals. Either the load unit or the store unit will ask the MMU to
perform address translation. However the address translation process is
not combinatorial as it is the case for the fetch interface. An
additional bank of registers delays the MMU's answer (on a TLB hit) an
additional cycle. As already mentioned in the previous paragraph address
translation is a quite critical process in terms of timing. The
particular problem on the data interface is the fact that the LSU needs
to generate the address beforehand. Address generation involves another
costly addition. Together with address translation this path definitely
becomes critical. As the data cache is virtually indexed and physical
tagged this additional cycle does not cost any loss in IPC. But, it
makes the process of memory requests a little bit more complicated as we
might need to abort memory accesses because of exceptions. If an
exception occurred on a load request the load unit needs to kill the
memory request it sent the cycle earlier. An excepting load (or store)
will never go to memory.

Both TLBs are fully set-associative and configurable in size. Also the
application specifier ID (ASID) can be changed in size. The ASID can
prevent flushing of certain regions in the TLB (for example when
switching applications). This is currently **not implemented**.

##### Page Table Walker (PTW)

The purpose of a page table walker has already been introduced in . The
page table walker listens on both ITLB and DTLB for incoming translation
requests. If it sees that either one of the requests is missing on the
TLB it saves the virtual address and starts its page table walk. If the
page table walker encounters any error state it will throw a page fault
exception which in return is caught by the MMU and propagated to either
the fetch interface or the LSU.

The page table walker gives precedence to DTLB misses. The page table
walking process is described in more detail in the RISC-V Privileged
Architecture.

#### PMA/PMP Checks

The core supports PMA and PMP checks in physical mode as well as with
virtual memory enabled. PMA checks are performed only on the final
access to the (translated) physical address. However, PMPs must be
checked during the page table walk as well. During a page walk, all
memory access must pass the PMP rules.

The amount of entries is parameterizable under the
`CVA6Cfg.NrPMPEntries` parameter. However, the core only supports
granularity 8 (G=8). This simplifies the implementation since we do
not have to worry about any unaligned accesses. There are a total of
three distinct PMP units in the design. They verify instruction
accesses, data loads and stores, and the page table walk respectively.

#### MMU Implementation Details

The MMU prioritizes instruction address translations to data address
translations. The behavior of the MMU is described in the following:
1.  As soon as a request from the instruction fetch stage arrives, the
ITLB checked for a cached entry (combinatorial path). Upon a cache miss,
the PTW is invoked.
2.  The PTW will perform the page table walk in multiple cycles. During
this walk, the PTW will update the content of the ITLB. The MMU checks
every cycle if a cache hit in the ITLB exists, and therefore, the page
table walk has concluded.

#### Multiplier

The multiplier contains a division and multiplication unit. Multiplication
is performed in two cycles and is fully pipelined (re-timing needed). The
division is a simple serial divider which needs 64 cycles in the worst case.

#### CSR Buffer

The CSR buffer is a functional unit which only purpose is to store the
address of the CSR register the instruction is going to read/write.
There are two reasons why we need to do this. The first reason is that
an CSR instruction alters the architectural state, hence this
instruction has to be buffered and can only be executed as soon as the
commit stage decides to commit the instruction. The second reason is the
way the scoreboard entry is structured: It has only one result
field but for any CSR instruction we need to keep the data we want to
write and the address of the CSR which this instruction is going to
alter. In order to not clutter the scoreboard with some special case bit
fields the CSR buffer comes into play. It simply holds the address and
if the CSR instruction is going to execute it will use the stored
address.

The clear disadvantage is that with the buffer being just one element we
can't execute more than one CSR instruction back to back without a
pipeline stall. Since CSR instructions are quite rare this is not too
much of a problem. Some CSR instructions will cause a pipeline flush
anyway.
